Hi, and welcome back.
In this video, we're going to look at adding new nodes
to a binary tree.
So this is the first step in constructing binary trees.
Adding to a binary tree is actually surprisingly simple,
in its sort of basic way.
We just have to make sure we add things
to the correct side of the tree.
For example, let's add the number five to this tree.
Notice that the tree here has a starting point,
what we call a head, or a root, of 14.
Then to the left it's got nine, nine has 13 to the right,
14 to the right has 22, and then 34.
We know where five should go, right, which is
to the left of nine.
But how do we tell Python to put it there?
We're gonna start with our new_node.
That is gonna be this node object.
A node object has three values, three properties.
One, which is value.
That's essentially the value we're trying to add,
and then it's got two other properties, left and right.
Those are the nodes that it has
to the left and to the right,
so we're starting with our new_node
that has nothing to the left, nothing to the right,
it's not even added yet, and a value of 5.
And we're also gonna start with our current_node,
which is gonna be the head of our tree.
Let's say the tree is self,
and the head is gonna be the node 14.
The first thing we must do is start a while loop.
We're going to start a while loop
because we're going to navigate
through potentially many nodes,
until we find the one that we wanna add to.
So we're gonna start a while loop,
and inside the while loop we're gonna say,
do we wanna go left or right?
So, if the new_node's value, which is five,
is less than the current_node's value,
which is 14, then we will wanna move left.
So, the first thing we do is add this if statement.
Is the new_node smaller than the current_node or RAT?
The answer is yes, so, yes.
What do we do?
We're gonna say, if the current_node,
which is 14, has a left node,
then we're gonna move to that node, okay?
So, if current_node.left is asking Python,
is the node 14, left node something other than none?
And at this point in time, it's yes,
because 14 has a left node, which is nine,
so what do we do?
We say current_node, which currently is 14,
is now gonna be equal to the current_node's left.
So we're essentially saying, move me to nine.
And that's what we do here.
Then, we go back to the top of the while loop.
So, current_node is now nine,
because we've set it to be the 14's left.
Once again, we ask ourselves,
is the new_node's value less than the current_node's value?
So new_node is five, current_node is nine,
so the answer to this is yes.
Then we're gonna ask ourselves, is there a left node
on current_node?
The answer's no, so we need a little bit more code here.
We can see that there is something not there,
so we are gonna add an else to our if.
So if the current_node's left exists, we move there.
If it doesn't exist, we say that the current_node's left
is now the new_node that we wanna add.
So, we put the five there, at the left of current_node,
and that's it.
Now nothing's missing there, but we don't want
to continue going through our loop.
Because we've added our new_node, that's it,
we are done.
So what we're gonna do here, is we're gonna add a break.
We looked at this early in the course.
A break is used to exit a loop.
So at this point, we set the left node
of nine to be the new_node,
that means we've added a node.
We wanna now stop going through our multiple nodes.
All we wanna do is now terminate, so we break.
Also something to take into consideration,
is what if the new_node's value
was not less than the current_node's value?
This if statement here,
we've got if new_node value is less than current_node value,
we go left,
but what if it's greater than the current_node's value?
We wanna go right.
So, we are gonna have an elif there to do just that.
Notice how now all the lefts have been changed to rights.
All that happens is,
if the new_node is greater than the current_node,
for example, let's say we were tryin' to add 21,
this would be true, so we would move right,
because it has a right node.
Then we would be at 22.
Once again we would go through our loop,
and now 21 would be less than 22,
so we would go in here and set 21 down here.
Hopefully, this makes some sense.
We're gonna look at some code,
and hopefully that'll help as well,
and sort of cement this knowledge.
And of course, something else that can happen
is that we try to add a node that has a value
that isn't less than or greater than a node.
That may happen if we try to add a new_node
that has a value exactly equal to an existing node.
So what we wanna do in that case is of course
to avoid duplicate elements.
As soon as your tree starts having duplicate elements,
you start running into some problems.
Do you put the node left or right?
So we don't want two of the same elements in a binary tree.
All we have to do is add another if statement there
at the top, saying raise a ValueError,
if the new_node's value is equal
to the current_node's value.
So as you go through the tree, if you encounter a situation
where the value you're tryin' to add is the same
as an existing element, you can raise an error,
or print something out.
That's it for this video.
I wanted to show you how to add new_nodes to a tree.
Now we're gonna go into some code,
and work on creating our binary tree class,
where we can find elements, add elements,
as well as print the tree out using our Inorder traversal.
I'll see you there.